lucy and karina want to find out how
healthy these whales are their sheer
size makes taking blood virtually
impossible
so Karina is the first scientist to try
to capture a sample of the whales breath
in the wild
let me take the lids off basically these
ones here
germs in the whale's breath will tell
Karina if they have any infections in
their lungs
but taking a sample is easier said than
done
as the sample dishes have to be held
right over the whales blowhole
I'm very disappointing
Rilla back in yes next time
they failed to capture a single sample
but Karina has an ingenious plan be okay
oh wow we are put a superb looking thing
on sir it's a fabulous idea to link
science collecting with a small
miniature helicopter Wow this project
for what with sample dishes attached the
helicopter can fly straight through the
whale's breath without disturbing them
but pilot Augustin PI n has strong winds
to contend with
the way they weight the blender with you
with this
we're moving up on swells right now it's
nice and slowly to parallel their course
and then he can swing this in and
collect a sample of the clothes that's
all natural timing go all the fit is
perfect man
nobody
just a bit further out all the things
gonna dive yeah can you believe it Tony
and Philippe aren't having much luck
either I think there's a ton load of
sonar conversations going on down there
at the moment which is basically the
sperm whales telling each other there's
bunch of wannabes nothing around horn
blaring and to get the heck out of here
you can just see them they're all just
diving all around us okay if they get in
their body despite the strong winds
they're finally getting closer with the
helicopter your get in there Paul was
right
that's the sample he's got it the germs
caught in the dish will help reveal more
information about the health of the
sperm whale population here well done
now continue yeah yeah okay and with
each sample so hard to collect this one
will be important for Karina's research
thank you perfect thanks very good okay
that was a good sample and what is it
that you're specifically looking for
with these micro bacteria for example
the agent that can cause tuberculosis
him often that's a very common germ that
causes infection in the lungs it can
cause severe problems you and meningitis
yes it's just a list of germs to start
with
Karina's early findings suggest whales
could have caught some of these bacteria
from humans perhaps through activities
like whale watching
her groundbreaking work has highlighted
this problem for the first time it might
be an important development in
protecting sperm whales